Major League Soccer (MLS) Designated Players (DPs) are brought into a team to elevate the level of each of the players around them. Teams can spend more money to sign them and pay them more in salary than players without the DP label. This does not always work out as intended by the front office of their club; Team compositions shift from year to year, coaches and playstyles change, and players age. Each of these factors heavily impacts the ability of researchers to project a player’s performance. In this paper, a proprietary archetype assignment framework is proposed and developed from data sourced from American Soccer Analysis. Normalizing each stat to 96 minutes – per industry standard – shows a preliminary method of grouping DPs according to class attributes. The archetypes are clustered according to the results of a Principal Component Analysis (PCA), which shows that approximately 80% of the variance can be explained by the first four principal components. The archetypes identify multiple latent dimensions that allow for the clustering of all sample players into one of the five clusters. While this may be a simple observational study of a limited sample of games and players, the results show the potential for more precise modeling with a broader sample space and dimensionality.

...

The results demonstrate that a reduced-dimensional representation of player performance can provide a stable and interpretable foundation for analysis of highly important players. By identifying latent performance dimensions and grouping players into archetypes, this approach can reduce reliance on noisy, high-dimensional raw data. Future research in this domain may involve locating and incorporating the match event data mentioned into consideration and recalculation of the archetypes identified. Additionally, the prospect of applying the methodology employed here to other leagues is an interesting one.
